From Hanselman it's dot
com. It's Hanselman. It's a
weekly discussion with web developer
and technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted
by Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan
announcing show number 93. Recorded
live Monday, December 10th, 2007. Support for
Hansel minutes is provided by
Tellerik already controls the most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forms and asp.net web
applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. Support is also
provided by dotnet developers journal.
The world's leading.net developer magazine
online at www dot
dot com. In this episode,
Scott discusses the test generation
tool pecks with Microsoft researchers
Pele do a loop and
Nikolai tape. Hi, this is
Scott Hansel, and this is
another episode of Hansel minutes,
and I'm sitting here in
Microsoft research on campus and
I'm talking to Pelli and
Nicola, and I'm not even
gonna try to pronounce your
last name, spell your last
name is K. And your
last name, sir. Two-man so
Peli and Nikolai are going
to be talking to me
today about pecs. And this
is something that we were
a little concerned. We wouldn't
be able to do a
podcast about because it's a,
it's kind of a visual
thing, but I try to
bring you the latest stuff
here on the show. And
I just thought this is
something we need to, we
need to hear about. I've
been pushing test driven development
and things like code coverage
for a very long time
on the show. I think
it's so important. We did
a show on software metrics
and the importance of things
like cyclometic complexity, maintenance, complexity,
to get an understanding of
how complicated your code is.
But while I thought I
was getting an understanding that
I think I'm testing my
code and all the different
branches, I realized that I
wasn't even getting close. So
palliate, tell me about PEX
and how this is going
to make it even easier
to test my code and
have an understanding of what
I've intended to do versus
what reality. So it's another
magic white box test generation
tool. Okay. What does this
mean? We automatically generate a
test case that will exercise
the code and we figure
out what to do by
monitoring the code that is
being run. So we are
actually doing some kind of
stetting analysis on the fly.
Okay. So I think that
our, our readership might understand
static analysis in the sense
that there's like the, the
basic example that you've got
a method that returns avoid
and takes a Boolean. How
many ways are there through
this? Perhaps there are two
pass in true pass and
false, assuming that there's no
branches and that you act
on that parameter, you can
look at that statically and
make a judgment call, right?
You could say you could
apply a value. This has
a complexity of two or
three, right? That's static, that's
static Analysis. Okay. What we
do, which is what our
analysis does, is it monitors
all the instructions that are
being executed by.net. And at
some point you will have
a branching instruction. So you
will, you will load that
parameter on the stack, and
then you will decide whether
or not to jump right
to the, to the L
statement or not. So we
record that. So we record
that based on the parameter,
you took a branch and
not the other one. And
we record the precise expression
at that point. Ah, so
rather than looking at the
code, parsing it and making
a static judgment about here
are all the things that
I think could happen. You're
doing static analysis dynamically. So
the farther you get into
the application, the more you
can see the branches ahead.
Yeah. So it's a, it's
an iterative process. And the
first time you will start
with simple values and you
will probably stop at the
first brunch. And then you
will try to create new
inputs to take the other
behavior. And then you might
uncover more branches down the
road on that path. And
so far, so the more
you iterate, the deeper you
go into the system and
the more you discover about
what it's supposed to do.
So if I had a
method that takes an integer,
and then I had an,
if I is smaller than
five, do you just go
one, two, three, four, five,
six? How do you know
at what point you're going
to switch, you know, take
the left fork of the
road or the right forest.
So thanks would start with
zero, right? And we would
have zero smaller than five
is, is true. So we
would take the true branch
and we'd go on. And
at the end of the
run, we would remember that
our meter is smaller than
five was true. So now
what we're going to do
is flip that condition. So
we want that the parameter
is greater or equal to
five. And then we send
that. So we build a
constraint system and we send
that to a gnotobiotic automated
theory, improver, which is called
, which is developed here
at research.  the theorem,
prover is another thing is
another component written by different.
Okay. And you can check
it out on the web
day. You can even download
it and play with it.
It's very interesting. So the,
the tier improver is going
to give us a solution
and it might be anything
it could give us. Five
is if it's nice, but
it probably would give us
a million. Oh, so it
doesn't look at that and
give you six. No, it
goes to the Tylee different
direction, almost like a binary
search. It's going back and
forth. It's probably, You're going
to flip a bit and
check, check if the condition
I'm not sure Nicola knows
more about the internals of
the, Does it, does it
matter? I mean, ultimately if
you're just trying to take
the other fork in the
road, doesn't matter. It doesn't
matter. Okay. If down the
road you check, whether it's
smaller than 10, then we'll
do yet another run and
we'll have one more constraint
in our system. And then
the constraint solver will actually
give us the correct number.
So this is about getting
coverage. It's not about Covering
every single input. I mean,
certainly testing one, if one
is less than five, we
don't need to test two,
three, and four, Or you
don't actually you don't. And
that saves time a number
of ways, doesn't it? Well,
heck States awhile. You'd rather
get this thing run all
day. If you could. Well,
when you look at random
approach or, you know, our
approaches where the user has
to provide ranges, random would
if, if you have a
condition, like I equals one,
two, three, right. Rhonda would
never find it. I see,
right. It has one over
two over three, two possibilities.
It will never find it.
If, if the number is
sufficiently high and it's out,
out outside of the ranch
that you gave it, you
will also not find it.
So brute force is just
not appropriate in many case
numbers, In many cases, brute
force doesn't scale to real
problems. So yeah, So you
generate tests. So actual C-sharp
is popping out of the
results of this. So I
write something, I annotate it
with a, a Peck specific
attribute to indicate that this
is something that I want
PEX to attack. When you
write, when you write a
unit test, you don't give
parameters usually. So the only
difference now is that you
can actually give parameters to
your method. And PEX is
going to use that to
inject values into the system.
And at the end of
the generation, we code gen.
So it's, C-sharp code that
actually calls back the original
method and that's it. And
once you have that, you
don't need PEX anymore. You
can actually run it with
your favorite test framework and,
and just to go on.
So this is not coded
necessarily dynamically generated every single
time I might run pecs
once a day, but my
tests may be running within
my continuous integration many, many
times a day. Yeah. So
there are many different scenarios,
but you might be developing
code on your home, on
your dev box. And then
once you feel it's ready
and pegs generated 50 tests,
you can actually check them
in, into your depo, right,
as unit test and have
them run by your continuation,
continuous integration as unit tests.
And you don't need, you
don't even need PEX on
that machine at that point.
Now, if you want to
be more aggressive, you could
actually have max run on
the continuous continuous integration server.
So the interesting points here
is that, you know, two
weeks down the road, the
guy next to you changes
your code, you know, fixes
a bug and then totally
screws up your logic, right?
And your unit tests are
not covering that. They don't,
they don't capture that, that
change of behavior, but that's
because it has this parameterized
test. We'll start exploring the
new code, generate new test
cases and my generate new
failures. And, you know, So
in that case, not running
texts, not running packs would
be a bad thing. I
want to keep it exploring
this new code as the
code of law. You, you
probably want to have it
explore, you know, forever the
more time, give it the
Deeper it's going to go
into the code. If it's
a large code base complex,
you know, it will need
a lot of times, hours,
days to really go into
those very, very, very deep
corner cases. So this sounds
like something I might want
to even dedicate a machine
to and just have PAX
running 24 hours a day.
Yes. You're looking, you're looking
at Nikolai like, well, I
guess why not 10 machines
also? I thought I was
being controversial by suggesting one.
You're thinking, you're thinking a
pecs farm, Nicole, you had
a comment. I mean, think
of it as your personal
Testa. And instead of paying
a person, a big salary,
you know, you can have
this huge farm of machines.
Certainly I fired a person
now, but so if you
really writing a lot of
software, it's still a good
idea to have dedicated tests.
I've switched to integration testing,
but a lot of tasks
that can be automated. That's
exactly what PEX is good
for. So instead of having
a Perth menu, looking at
other parts of your code
that are covered or not
covered, a lot of that
can be automated by pecs.
So we're talking about theory,
theoretical things and computational things.
And of course, these are
difficult concepts to, to visualize
when you're talking in an
audio only format like we
are in the podcast, but
I can understand in a
complicated computational environment doing lots
of ifs and branches and
four loops. But what if
I started in involving the
environment, looking in the file
system, talking to the database,
what kinds of things can
PEX help there? Or in
what ways is that not
a valid thing? You know,
when does unit testing become
integration testing? So PEX will
definitely help you detect that
you are not testable. So
it will detect that you
are actually reading a file
or you're actually hitting a
database or, and you haven't
marketed, right? Because banks will
not understand the file system
banks understands manage code. It
can, it can monitor, manage
code. If you call a
web service and go through,
you know, through the web
or something, we don't understand
the logic in there. So
if you called file exists
and you pass in a
string, we cannot figure out
which file name you do
to make it true. So
at that point, what happens?
You get a bad coverage.
So there's a branch that
we cannot cover, and you
will see that in the
reports. So what does it
tell you? He tell you
that PEX couldn't, couldn't solve
that's little constraint system, right?
But it really tells you
that for us it's you
should have mocked this. So
you should have put a
layer of abstraction between you
and the file system so
that you could actually simulate
a return true solution. Right.
That's very interesting because we
had done a show before
on mocking and I didn't
think I quite understood it.
And now I'm starting to
realize that in order to
really get full coverage of
your code, that, that marketing
in this instance, marking out
the environment, physical things, abstracting
away so that the logical
intent is being tested is
it's so important. And actually
it's very easy to shoot
in your foot. When you
do unit tests, it's very
easy to call to, you
know, call, I mean, file
open. Everybody does that all
the time. And it's actually
painful to, to have pure
code that is fully marked,
you know, fully, you know,
inversion of control. And so
it's actually a lot of
work. Now, techs will help
you because it will not
work as, as well as
it should should do. If
you start calling, you know,
another example, HTTP context, you
know, how do, how do
you handle this guy? Of
course now in the new
MVC framework, that'll be an
interface. Yes, that's great. If
I can mock all these
things away I could do
so pecs with the MVC
framework would be a really
good thing. I could get
really good code coverage on
my controllers. Wouldn't I? Yes.
So PEX com comes with
its own mock framework. So
it doesn't, it's, it's similar
in some aspect and it's
radically different in from all
existing mock frameworks. So the,
the, the big difference is
that it's basically a source
of choices. So when you
call an API and say,
give me a bullion, you
bet you're basically asking techs,
choose between true and false.
Right? So you don't set
the expectations we do. And
then we record that in
the generated test. Wow. Okay.
My, my brain just exploded.
So with mocking frameworks, you
usually set up the expectation
ahead of time, and you
say in a non parameterized
test, alright, this in this
case will return false. If
I was going to return
true, I would have an
entirely different test. And then
I would Mark that and
it would return false. So
you're saying that I set
up the domain. So it's
a domain based marketing system.
I said, here's the, let
me, the domain is not
range. Rather. I say, here's
the range of things that
could come back. Yeah. You,
you, you said a small
behavior, it's a domain. So
I mean, a bullying can
be true or false, but
you can have behavior in
that. You could say you
could also, bullying is kind
of not a good example.
What's a good example then.
Let's see. What about The
visa card you had as
an example earlier where you
were doing something with visa
cards? I thought it was
interesting. Yeah, We okay. We
can mock the visa card.
So we have a service.
You give it a string.
That's supposed to contain a
visa number and returns, whether
it's valid, invalid, or whether
it's valid or invalid. Now
the logic that handles that
couldn't care less, whether it's
a valid number, it queries
a service, which gives an
answer. So the mock in
written the back's way will
say, give me a bullion.
And based on what you
do with this bullying, it
will make it true or
false. Okay. So you're giving
PEX the context that it
needs around that MOC to
make the different kind of
branching decisions, it would need
to get full coverage. Yeah.
So the visa, the visa
example, this is Great example
to talk about test assumptions.
Okay. So, because If you
look at your pocket, you
notice all the visa cards
starts, this number four that's
from, from other companies, they
may start with a five
or whatever. So when you
want to check a credit
card validation algorithms that checks
whether all the numbers make
up,  dynamo, you should
stop looking at the first
digit, make sure it's the
fourth only under the assumption.
That's the first digit is
a four. All the other
digits have to be in
a certain way for a
visa card, right? So this
is a test that has
assumptions and Ananda, these assumptions.
It makes a statement about
the other digits, right? And
when you write mock service
packs, that's similar. So if
you don't fight assumptions on
the mocks, PEX is free
to choose arbitrary value. So
if you have an API
that you Mark that, an
integer Paxil, the truth and
the entertainer, no restriction on
the domain whatsoever only then
if you go in and
make a statement about legal
domains, or if you make,
if you have assumptions about
what the return value really
should be, and you don't
care about others, then pecs
list ticks the different things
that can be returned. So
in that sense, it's radically
different from other mock frameworks.
So you have to say
precisely, what is returned this
pecs by default, anything goes,
and only if you add
assumptions, if you write them
down, pecs will be more
specific. This is starting to
get me to think that
PEX is a lot like
a, a chest solver. There
are rules of the game,
and you need to give
PEX as much context as
possible for it to make
the right decisions. Otherwise, you're
going to be generating tests
that aren't useful. Otherwise it
would try to kill the
King with, you know, 16,
Just take the pawn and
then just smack the King
on the house. And this
is really interesting because from
a point of view of,
of static analysis, let's just
use a, you know, the
human brain looks at a
couple of line long application
and says, it looks like
there's two or three branches
there just by looking at
it. We do static analysis
with our heads, but you're
doing static analysis in a,
in a dynamic way, in
the sense that you're going
to move that chess piece
and then reevaluate the entire
board and then move another
branch and another branch, another
branch. And in each step,
you are discovering new things
by virtue of the fact
that you've kind of gone
into the future. So earlier
I asked you if a
lot of this could be
parallelized that's when I was
thinking that there was a
body of work that was
known and understood, it sounds
like you're discovering longer. You
run the more and more
that you're going to discover.
There are opportunities to prior
allies. We can dig into
the details, but sure, basically
when you, when you have
a trace, so when you've
run through the program, you
might have gone through a
large number of branches that
you haven't taken. And for
each of those branches, you
need to solve a constraint
system. So we might decide
to prioritize, But not the
branching, not the discovery of
the branches though. Right? Well,
you're in our approach. You'll
always need to pick the
next branch yeah. And solve
the constraint system and then
run it and then go
on. So, so one idea
here. So we couldn't probably
do a lot of this
analysis in Parlier. So right
now we are doing it's
essentially because that kind of
guarantees you, that you get
minimal test feedback from pecs.
So on even Peck step
after step can increase coverage,
your tests, which gets bigger
and bigger. So every new
test increases coverage. Whereas if
you will do things in
Parlier, it might be that
things are more redundant. So
it's kind of a research
problem to figure out how
to really make it efficient.
And partly, ultimately we are
running code. So we are
actually running your code. And
if you don't expect that,
and we started running in
parallel, we might start finding
false positives, which is something
that PEX doesn't have all
the failures that PEX will
find our actual failures. So
how does PEX know when
it's done? I mean, when,
w w w can you
test, can you, can you
truly look at a method
and test it completely For
certain methods? Yes. But as
soon as you have a
loop, or if the cousin
and the function, it's an
theoretically undecidable problem, then you
can really stop PEX, doesn't
know eyes. If you go
around to the loop one
more time, maybe then something
new happens. So whenever you
have loop or recursion, basically
you tell a time-bound, you
have three minutes time, and
then PEX, TEDS, you will,
all the things it could
find visit at that time.
Why the mocking is so
important, because as soon as
you reach out to the
theoretical end of the physical
touch, the file system and
touch the network, anything could
happen, unexpected things can happen.
And then the number of
things that the, the, the
size of what could be
tested is infinite, Right? So
it gets infinite very quickly.
And that's also why we
had this idea of having
a machine, which just let
PEX run forever, because he
really can let pecs run
forever when you have a
loop. And every interesting program
has a loop. Think, I
think we should make a
screensaver that runs PEX when
the screensaver is going, You
might want to have a
quad core for that. Alright.
So let me get my
brain around this. I'm just
having trouble getting a visualization
here. Traditionally, when I write
unit tests, they don't have
parameters at all. The first
time I saw parameter tests
were when I was first
introduced to MB unit, right.
A and B unit. Oh,
I happened to have written
that You did. I think
that if I wrote MBA
unit, I would probably make
t-shirts and I would just
have it say, I wrote
MBA unit, buy me a
beer. Unfortunately, nobody in my
entourage, especially my wife really
appreciate my, this kind of,
That is a shame because
that is a, an amazing
piece of work. So the
road test stuff in NBA
unit is really kind of
its most famous feature. The
ability to call a test
and pass in parameters, iterate
over a single test. Yeah.
I was a bit surprised
by this one. People really
like, I think the conciseness
of, of the, of this
little micro language and, and
definitely parameterized tests is something
useful in many, in many
cases, not all cases, but
people just happen to like
it. Now, when you showed
me the demo earlier, where
we did a test of
the credit card, you ran
through thousands, a at least
a thousand tests within just
a few seconds. So we
actually executed a thousand times
the, the actual tests, we
did a thousand different inputs,
but we emitted seven tests
that actually yielded two different
coverage. So rather than generating
a mess of C-sharp with
a thousand tests, which would
be the brute force method,
which we decided earlier would
not be a good idea.
How did it come up
with seven Actually? So the
brute force mess would be
much, much more because every
number can be from zero
to 10 and they are
like 60 numbers in each.
So already the tow, this
housing was very cleverly chosen,
and only seven of them
actually increased coverage. So the
seven number wasn't set as
a parameter. It wasn't anything
that I had to say.
Or you had to say
PEX determined that that was
the correct number of tests
for the kind of coverage
that we needed. No, it
still, There is a bound
on the number of runs.
The default value is a
thousand brands. Okay. So say
it discovered seven tests that
were correct tests that increased
coverage given the present the,
the limit of 1000. Yes.
So there is a loop
in the code that validates
to the credit card number.
So it could go. So
if I gave it run,
if I let it run
all day long, it wouldn't
discover thousands of tests. It
would only discover as many
tests as there were branches,
each test increases coverage. Okay.
And is a credit card
and a good example of
one where I could test
it until it's done. I
mean, I know that maybe
I, maybe this is silly
for me to think that
I could actually have a
hundred percent coverage, but I
want to know how far
I can squeeze this, Not
a terribly good example, but
in some sense, who, who
says that all the credit
card numbers have to be
off a reasonable length? What
if we have a credit
card number that is 1000
characters long, maybe your code
breaks, then we don't know,
and PEX would have to
find out that texts Sometimes.
So then this is where
the assumptions come into to
point of view, right? This
is where you tell pecs
stay in this area. Is
that correct? The assumption will
definitely restraint PEX from trying,
you know, to, to explore
the entire state space. Okay.
And you can just write
an assumption. Let's assume the
number is less than 100
index. Okay. Or in the
instance of a, kind of
the typical credit card, but
it's 13 or at 16
and stay in that space.
Yeah, definitely. Or that something
that you would probably want
to write as an assertion.
Right. So if it's checked,
then it would be off
the length, but what numbers
do we even want to
try to check? Well, they
should be between the rent
a hundred. So what kind
of, when would, I want
to use a, a PEX
assumption to say PEX that
we're assuming these, this case
versus an assertion in a
test. So in, in the
case of the credit card,
you would assume that the
first character, the first number
is four. Okay. Which is
the w which is for
visa visa. And then you
could actually try to validate
it and then assume that
it's valid. Okay. And then
if it's a valid though,
so your code at validates
should have discovered that it's
actually the right length for
a visa card number, and
then you can actually assert
on the length. So you
can assert that the length
should be 13 or 16,
if it means, if it
met those previous assumptions, if
the first number was a
four and it was a
valid number, then you can,
so you can actually kind
of split your, your, your
respect there. So there might
giving PEX that additional bit
of context, it stays in
the, in the domain that
it needs to be playing
in and then provides the
most value. And it becomes
more meaningful to you. Cool.
So we'll put links to
your blogs and then the
research project up on the
show site to make sure
that when people can go
up and learn more about
this, I know you've got
lots of samples and articles
that you've been writing about
hex recently, and we'll hopefully
we'll see PEX real soon
and people will be able
to, to play with this
project from Microsoft research. I
appreciate both of your time
Pelly and Nikolai for taking
time out of your day
to sit down and explain
to me about how the
huge brains in Microsoft research
work. I really appreciate it.
And that we'll probably do
maybe some, some screencasts in
the future so we can
see some of what's going
on with pecs. You're always
welcome. Oh, well, thank you
very much. And this has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes. We'll see you again
next week.